.TH PVAULT 1 "2026-07-12" "PVault 0.1.0-pre-alpha" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pvault \- experimental local-first password vault
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pvault
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pvault
is a keyboard-driven password vault for Linux. It stores records in one local,
authenticated encrypted file and retrieves secret fields through a short-lived
clipboard owner.
.PP
PVault is pre-alpha software. It has not received an independent security audit
and must not be used for real credentials or as the only copy of important
data.
.PP
The master password is read from the controlling terminal with echo disabled.
It is never accepted as a command-line argument. Secret fields are not printed
by normal commands. Record selectors are also kept out of command-line
arguments; commands that target a record use the internal picker.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init [--vault PATH] --recovery-out PATH
Create a new vault and a separate recovery-key file. The destination recovery
file must not already exist. Move that file to separate offline storage after
verifying it. If vault creation succeeds but writing the recovery file fails,
the empty vault is retained; unlock it with the master password and run
.B recovery rotate --out PATH
before adding records. New master passwords must contain at least 16 bytes and
must not be a recognized common value, full sequence, or periodic repetition.
This is a guardrail rather than an entropy estimate; prefer a randomly
generated 5-6 word passphrase.
.TP
.B add
Create a record using the internal terminal form. The success message is
generic and does not reveal the new persistent record identifier.
.TP
.B edit
Select a record with the internal picker and edit it. Secret values are not
passed to an external editor. The success message does not reveal the persistent
record identifier.
.TP
.B remove
Select a record with the internal picker and mark it as deleted after a private
terminal confirmation.
.TP
.B list [--allow-redirect]
List record summaries. Because titles, usernames, flags, counts, and record
identifiers are protected metadata, non-terminal stdout is refused unless
.B --allow-redirect
is present.
.TP
.B show [--allow-redirect]
Select a record with the internal picker and show its metadata. Passwords and
custom fields marked secret are omitted. Non-terminal stdout is refused unless
.B --allow-redirect
is present.
.TP
.B copy [--field password|username|url|custom] [--ttl SECONDS]
Select a record with the internal picker and offer the selected field through
the clipboard for a limited time. FIELD defaults to password. With
.BR "--field custom" ,
sanitized custom-field names are listed on
.I /dev/tty
and selected by a private ordinal, so duplicate names remain addressable and
arbitrary names are never accepted through argv. SECONDS defaults to the configured clipboard
TTL, initially 10.
.TP
.B pick [--copy] [--rofi] [--allow-redirect]
Search records with the keyboard-driven picker. The default picker runs inside
PVault. With
.BR --rofi ,
only a sanitized display title and a random token valid for that invocation are
exposed to the external picker; the persistent record identifier is not sent.
Without
.BR --copy ,
the selected metadata is refused on non-terminal stdout unless
.B --allow-redirect
is present. The redirect option is invalid together with
.BR --copy .
.TP
.B generate [--length N]
Generate a password using libsodium randomness and offer it through the
clipboard. It is not printed. N defaults to 24 and must be from 12 through 256.
.TP
.B passwd [--recovery FILE]
Change the password keyslot without changing the random vault master key.
Normally the current master password authenticates the operation. With
.BR --recovery ,
read the recovery key from FILE and use it to authorize setting a new master
password. The recovery key itself is never accepted as an argument.
The same new-password policy used by
.B init
is enforced here.
.TP
.B recovery rotate --out PATH
Generate a new recovery keyslot and write the replacement recovery code to a
new file. The previous recovery key becomes invalid after a successful save.
.TP
.B backup --output PATH
Copy the current encrypted vault snapshot to PATH.
.TP
.B restore PATH
Authenticate an encrypted backup before replacing the active vault. The current
vault is backed up before replacement. Restore rolls back the complete snapshot,
including password and recovery keyslots; historical credentials may become
active again. An existing active vault must have the same vault ID as the
backup; cross-vault replacement is rejected. The active ID is read from its
cleartext header and does not authenticate a damaged active body.
.TP
.B rescue inspect SNAPSHOT
Validate private-file metadata, size, and framing without a credential. All
reported header values are explicitly unauthenticated. The body is not parsed
and no file is written.
.TP
.B rescue verify SNAPSHOT [--recovery FILE] [--allow-redirect]
Authenticate the complete snapshot with a master password read from the TTY or
with FILE, then report only authenticated format, vault ID, generation, record
count, and encrypted snapshot hash. Record contents are not displayed.
Non-terminal stdout is refused unless
.B --allow-redirect
is present.
.TP
.B rescue recover SNAPSHOT --output PATH [--recovery FILE]
Authenticate SNAPSHOT and publish a byte-exact encrypted copy at a new PATH.
The destination is mode 0400, is never overwritten, and is verified by readback.
The source and configured active vault are not modified.
.TP
.B rollback SNAPSHOT --output PATH [--recovery FILE]
Create the same authenticated, read-only separate copy for application rollback.
This command never replaces the active vault and is not an in-place format
downgrade. Use the signed compatible reader against PATH explicitly.
.TP
.B config check
Validate the optional configuration file and its owner, mode, link count,
regular-file type, immediate parent, size, syntax, duplicate keys, and value
bounds. A missing file under an absent or valid immediate parent selects the
built-in defaults; an unsafe existing parent fails closed. No paths or
configured values are printed. This check runs even when normal commands reject
the configuration.
.TP
.B doctor
Check file framing and parent, snapshot, and lock metadata, then request the
master password to authenticate and validate the complete payload. Record
content is not displayed.
.TP
.B shell
Open an interactive session. The decrypted vault stays only in the current
process and locks after the configured inactivity timeout (300 seconds by
default). Both stdin and stdout must be terminals; shell metadata is never
permitted on redirected stdout.
.TP
.B help
Display the commands supported by the installed revision.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --vault " PATH"
Use the absolute PATH instead of the configured/default vault. Relative paths
are rejected.
.TP
.B --allow-redirect
Permit protected metadata on non-terminal stdout for
.BR list ,
.BR show ,
a non-copying
.BR pick ,
or
.BR "rescue verify" .
This is an explicit acknowledgement, not encryption or destination hardening.
The caller remains responsible for permissions, logs, retention, and downstream
consumers.
.TP
.BR -h , " --help"
Display command help.
.TP
.B --version
Display the program version.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/pvault/vault.pvlt
Default encrypted vault. If
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
is unset,
.I $HOME/.local/share
is used.
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/pvault/backups/
Encrypted snapshot backups.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/pvault/config
Non-secret configuration. If
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset,
.I $HOME/.config
is used.
.PP
PVault creates private directories with mode 0700 and files with mode 0600
under a restrictive umask. These permissions do not protect data from root or
from a compromised user session.
.PP
PVault does not chmod an existing parent directory. The immediate parent of a
vault, backup, or recovery destination must be owned by the current user and
must not be group/world-writable.
.PP
Vault writes hold that immediate-parent directory open from lock acquisition
through commit and readback, address transaction entries relative to it, and
recheck the configured pathname around publication. This confines directory
replacement races but does not make an untrusted ancestor safe.
.PP
Vaults and encrypted snapshots read by PVault must be regular non-symlink files
owned by the current user, with one hard link and mode 0400 or 0600. PVault
creates them as 0600. A 0400 snapshot can be opened, backed up, and restored,
but cannot be saved in place. A 0400 automatic snapshot is pinned outside
retention. Copy a snapshot from media without reliable POSIX ownership,
link-count, and mode semantics into a private local directory before using
.BR restore .
.PP
For a custom vault path, automatic snapshots are stored in a literal
.I backups/
directory beside the vault. For example,
.I /safe/pvault/main.pvlt
uses
.IR /safe/pvault/backups/ .
PVault rejects a symlink or foreign-owned backup directory and may set an
existing owner-owned backup directory to mode 0700. Use a dedicated vault
parent to avoid colliding with an unrelated directory named
.IR backups .
.PP
Automatic names encode the vault ID and source generation as
.IR auto-v1-<vault-id>-g<generation>.pvlt .
Retention is per vault and runs after a verified commit. Manual, legacy,
pre-restore, pre-migration, other-vault, future-generation, malformed, and
unsafe entries are preserved. A suspicious managed entry stops that pruning
pass rather than risking deletion. Managed candidates are AEAD-authenticated,
CBOR-parsed, and required to carry the generation encoded in their filename
before deletion. Backup names are published atomically without replacement.
.SH CLIPBOARD
On X11, PVault uses
.B xclip
as a foreground selection owner. On Wayland it uses
.BR wl-copy .
The helper is executed directly without a shell; the secret travels through an
anonymous pipe, not an argument or environment variable.
.PP
Wayland values that are valid UTF-8 without NUL use
.BR text/plain;charset=utf-8 ;
other byte strings use
.BR application/octet-stream .
The receiving application may decline a binary MIME type.
.PP
PVault reports a successful transport after the payload is written to the pipe,
the write end is closed, the owner is observed alive, and the expiration timer
is armed. This does not prove that the external backend acquired a usable
selection, so diagnostics say queued rather than copied. The timer includes time
spent suspended. At expiration PVault terminates only the clipboard owner it
created. It does not copy an empty value, so newer clipboard content is not
intentionally erased. The owner is also terminated by the kernel if its PVault
supervisor dies abruptly.
Clipboard managers and applications can retain a password after reading it;
expiration cannot revoke an already consumed copy. X11 clients in the same
session can request the selection.
.SH PICKER AND METADATA OUTPUT
The internal picker reads and renders through
.I /dev/tty
so search terms and persistent record identifiers do not need to enter argv.
The earlier pre-alpha forms
.BR "edit QUERY" ,
.BR "remove QUERY" ,
.BR "list QUERY" ,
.BR "show QUERY" ,
and
.BR "copy QUERY"
are deliberately rejected with an invalid-usage status. This is a breaking
pre-alpha change; the arguments are not silently reinterpreted. Scripts that
parsed the old Added-ID or Updated-ID status must also be changed because those
identifiers are no longer emitted.
.PP
Rejection cannot retract an argument already supplied to the shell and kernel.
Do not test a legacy positional form with real metadata; use synthetic text.
.PP
Rofi is opt-in. PVault sanitizes each title, associates it with a new ephemeral
token for the current invocation, and sends those two values to rofi. It never
sends the persistent record ID. Rofi is executed with an allowlist containing
only required display, runtime, authentication, home, and locale variables.
Rofi remains external to the trusted core and can observe every displayed
title.
.PP
Protected metadata is printed only to terminal stdout unless
.B --allow-redirect
was supplied for a command that supports it. Successful
.B add
and
.B edit
messages are generic and contain no record ID. Diagnostic errors do not repeat
a rejected positional selector.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is a strict, non-secret file containing one
.I key=value
assignment per line. Blank lines and lines whose first non-space character is
.B #
are ignored. Unknown or duplicate keys, embedded NUL, oversized input, relative
vault paths, and invalid values are rejected rather than silently ignored. LF
and CRLF endings are accepted. The complete file is parsed transactionally.
When present, it must be a current-user-owned regular non-symlink file with one
hard link and mode 0400 or 0600, below an owner-controlled immediate parent
that is not group/world writable. Accepted keys are:
.TP
.B vault_path=PATH
Absolute vault path. The default is the XDG data path documented under FILES.
.TP
.B clipboard_ttl_seconds=N
Clipboard lifetime from 1 through 300 seconds. The default is 10.
.TP
.B session_idle_seconds=N
Shell inactivity timeout from 30 through 86400 seconds. The default is 300.
.TP
.B backup_retention=N
Number of encrypted automatic snapshots to retain, from 1 through 1000. The
default is 20.
.TP
.B picker=internal|rofi
Picker implementation. The default is
.BR internal .
.PP
Do not place passwords, recovery keys, or other secrets in this file.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Operation not performed because an object was not found or the destination
already exists.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command or option, including a rejected positional record selector or
protected metadata directed to non-terminal stdout without explicit opt-in.
.TP
.B 3
Authentication, integrity, malformed-format, or unsupported-version failure.
.TP
.B 4
Input/output failure, or a published update whose durability could not be
confirmed.
.TP
.B 5
Required secure-memory or process-hardening operation failed.
.TP
.B 6
Vault lock or concurrent-update conflict.
.TP
.B 7
External integration, such as a clipboard backend, is unavailable.
.SH SECURITY NOTES
Use a strong, unique, randomly generated master passphrase and keep the recovery
key separate from encrypted backups. The weak-pattern filter is not an entropy
estimate. Prefer encrypted swap and avoid unencrypted hibernation.
Do not use persistent clipboard history for secrets. If an update reports that
it was committed but durability could not be confirmed, preserve both the old
and new recovery material and verify the vault before taking another action.
.PP
PVault remains pre-alpha, has not received an independent security audit, and
must not be used for real credentials. Use
.B --allow-redirect
only for a deliberately private destination; PVault cannot retract metadata
after another process or file has consumed it.
.PP
.B mlock
reduces normal swap exposure but does not protect from root, a compromised
kernel, a debugger, malicious display-server clients, or physical-memory
attacks. Catchable signals during hidden secret input restore the TTY before
the original signal is re-raised. SIGKILL and power loss do not execute cleanup
code.
.PP
See
.I THREAT_MODEL.md
and
.I docs/FORMAT.md
and
.I docs/COMPATIBILITY.md
in the source distribution for the complete design boundary, file format, and
migration policy.
.SH BUGS
Report ordinary bugs through the project issue tracker using synthetic data.
Follow
.I SECURITY.md
for vulnerabilities; never publish a real vault, password, recovery key, or
memory dump.
.SH LICENSE
GPL-3.0-or-later.
